

# --- Learning Sparse Graphon Mean Field Games ---

## Abstract

Although the field of multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has made considerable progress in the last years, solving systems with a large number of agents remains a hard challenge. Graphon mean field games (GMFGs) enable the scalable analysis of MARL problems that are otherwise intractable. By the mathematical structure of graphons, this approach is limited to dense graphs which are insufficient to describe many real-world networks such as power law graphs. Our paper introduces a novel formulation of GMFGs, called LPGMFGs, which leverages the graph theoretical concept of  $L^p$  graphons and provides a machine learning tool to efficiently and accurately approximate solutions for sparse network problems. This especially includes power law networks which are empirically observed in various application areas and cannot be captured by standard graphons. We derive theoretical existence and convergence guarantees and give empirical examples that demonstrate the accuracy of our learning approach for systems with many agents. Furthermore, we extend the Online Mirror Descent (OMD) learning algorithm to our setup to accelerate learning speed, empirically show its capabilities, and conduct a theoretical analysis using the novel concept of smoothed step graphons. In general, we provide a scalable, mathematically well-founded machine learning approach to a large class of otherwise intractable problems of great relevance in numerous fields.

Examples include neurons in the human brain (Avena-Koenigsberger et al. (2018), Bullmore and Sporns (2009), Bullmore and Sporns (2012), Sporns (2022)), people trading on a stock market (Bakker et al. (2010), Bian et al. (2016)) or the spreading of contagious diseases among citizens of a society (Newman (2002), Pastor-Satorras et al. (2015)). Due to their complexity, these systems are in general hard to model and are often controlled by using multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL). In the last years, the field of MARL has experienced significant progress, see Canese et al. (2021) or Yang and Wang (2020) for an overview, but crucial open problems remain. While many approaches provide sound empirical results, they often lack a solid theoretical foundation (Zhang et al. (2021)). Furthermore, as the number of agents in the system increases, numerous MARL algorithms become computationally expensive and are thereby hardly scalable.

Mean field games (MFGs) (Carmona and Delarue (2018a), Carmona and Delarue (2018b)) have proven to be a valid approach for achieving both scalability and theoretical guarantees in multi-agent systems. Since they were introduced independently by Huang et al. (2006) and Lasry and Lions (2007) to address game theoretic challenges, they have become a major interest in various research fields. Extensions of the original MFG model include discrete-time formulations (Cui and Koeppl (2022), Saldi et al. (2018)), variants with major and minor agents (Carmona and Zhu (2016), Firoozi et al. (2020), Nourian and Caines (2013)) as well as zero-sum games (Choutri and Djehiche (2019), Choutri et al. (2019)). MFGs are based on the weak interaction principle where each individual has a negligible influence on the whole system. Besides the numerical and theoretical benefits of this principle, MFGs provide the modelling framework for various applications, such as autonomous driving (Huang et al. (2020)), cyber security (Kolokoltsov and Malafeyev (2018)), big data architectures (Castiglione et al. (2014)), and systemic risk in financial markets (Carmona et al. (2015), Elie et al. (2020a)). There is also some work that aims to apply MFGs to real world tasks, e.g. social networks (Yang et al. (2018)) or swarm robotics (Elamvazhuthi and Berman (2019), Cui et al. (2022)), but this field largely remains to be developed. Although our paper is of theoretical nature, its goal is to make MFGs more realistic, as we discuss below.

## 1 INTRODUCTION

In various research areas, scientists are confronted with systems of many interacting individuals or components.

Both from the classical equilibrium learning perspective and the reinforcement learning (RL) perspective, MFGs are able to provide solutions for numerous challenges where other equilibrium learning or MARL algorithms become computationally intractable. Here, learning refers to both classical computation of equilibria and RL – also known as approximate optimal control (Bertsekas (2019)) – with focus on solving complex control problems without knowing or using the model. Current RL research is addressing the approximation of Nash equilibria for stationary games (Subramanian and Mahajan (2019)), under the occurrence of noise (Carmona et al. (2019)), using entropy regularization (Anahtarci et al. (2020), Cui and Koepl (2021), Guo et al. (2022)), leveraging Fictitious Play (Cardaliaguet and Hadikhanloo (2017), Delarue and Vasileiadis (2021), Hadikhanloo and Silva (2019), Mguni et al. (2018), Perrin et al. (2021a), Perrin et al. (2021b), Perrin et al. (2020)), and increasing the robustness and efficiency of learning algorithms in general (Guo et al. (2019), Guo et al. (2020)). A learning scheme of particular interest for our paper is Online Mirror Descent (OMD) (Orabona et al. (2015), Srebro et al. (2011)). RL research has leveraged OMD to learn MFGs (Hadikhanloo (2017), Laurière et al. (2022), Perolat et al. (2021)) which ensures algorithmic scalability.

For learning applications, decision-making on graphs appears to be particularly interesting. Here, we refer to agents connected via graphical edges, as opposed to agents with states on a graph as considered e.g. in Li et al. (2019). Apart from direct graphical decompositions in MARL Qu et al. (2020), there has been recent research interest in MFGs on graphs. In classical MFGs each agent weakly interacts with all other agents at once which seems to be an unrealistic modelling assumption for many applications. To overcome this concern, graphon mean field games (Aurell et al. (2021), Caines and Huang (2019), Carmona et al. (2022), Gao and Caines (2017), Gao et al. (2021)) (GMFGs) provide a well-established tool to model games with a graphical structure. For example, Tangpi and Zhou (2022) apply GMFGs to model investment decisions in a financial market. Also based on GMFGs, Aurell et al. (2022) develop models on epidemics and provide the corresponding machine learning methods for outcome estimation. So far, most of the literature has focused on MFGs on dense graphs. To the best of our knowledge, there are only a few papers that consider sparse graphs. While Gkogkas and Kuehn (2022) focuses on Kuramoto-like models, Lacker and Soret (2022) is concerned with linear-quadratic stochastic differential games. Finally, Bayraktar et al. (2020) considers systems on not-so-dense graphs but without control and without leveraging  $L^p$  graphons. By utilizing  $L^p$  graphons (Borgs et al. (2018), Borgs et al. (2019)), our paper’s aim is to provide a general framework for learning MFGs on sparse graphs.

Sparse power law graphs (Barabási and Albert (1999), Barabási et al. (1999)) are of great interest for various

research applications such as social networks (Aparicio et al. (2015)), software engineering (Concas et al. (2007), Louridas et al. (2008), Wheeldon and Counsell (2003)), finance (D’Arcangelis and Rotundo (2016)), or biology (Nosonovsky and Roy (2020)). For more examples, see Newman (2018). Although there is strong empirical evidence for power law graphs in many research fields as mentioned above, GMFGs cannot capture these naturally sparse structures. LPGMFGs and the corresponding learning methods presented in our paper provide a novel ML tool to solve such real-world problems that are otherwise intractable. Our contributions can be summarized as follows: (i) introducing MFGs on  $L^p$  Graphons (LPGMFGs) which formalize MFGs on sparse graphs; (ii) conducting a theoretical analysis of LPGMFGs that includes the existence of equilibria as well as convergence guarantees; (iii) evaluating LPGMFGs on different examples empirically, especially in a multi-class agent setup; (iv) adapting the OMD learning scheme to our setup and thereby accelerating learning speed; (v) conducting both an empirical and a theoretical convergence analysis for the adapted OMD algorithm. Thus, our paper provides a scalable, mathematically well founded approach for learning MARL problems on sparse graphs on the theoretical side. On the practical side, different empirical examples demonstrate the scalability of the learning method and give an impression of how models on sparse graphs are often more realistic than dense networks.

## 2 $L^p$ GRAPHONS

**Central Concepts.** In this section, we briefly introduce the concept of  $L^p$  graphons pioneered by Borgs et al. (2018) and Borgs et al. (2019) which provide more details.  $L^p$  graphons can be informally thought of as adjacency matrices for graphs with (almost) infinitely many nodes. Naturally, approximating sparse finite graphs by these  $L^p$  graphons leads to the loss of some topological information, see e.g. Borgs et al. (2018). Nevertheless,  $L^p$  graphons provide an expressive asymptotic approximation of the finite case which we show both theoretically and empirically on the next pages. In contrast to standard graphons which are limited to dense graphs,  $L^p$  graphons are more general and also apply to sparse graphs. An  $L^p$  graphon is a symmetric, integrable function  $W: [0, 1]^2 \to \mathbb{R}$  with  $\|W\|_p < \infty$  where the  $L^p$  norm on graphons is  $\|W\|_p := \left( \int_{[0,1]^2} |W(x, y)|^p \, dx \, dy \right)^{1/p}$  for  $1 \le p < \infty$  and the essential supremum if  $p = \infty$ .

To quantify whether a graphon is a good approximation for a sequence of finite graphs, we associate every finite graph  $G = (V(G), E(G))$  with a graphon  $W^G$ . For a graph  $G$  with  $N$  nodes, we partition the unit interval  $[0, 1]$  into  $N$  intervals  $I_1, \dots, I_N$  of equal length. Then, the function  $W^G$  is assigned a constant value on each square  $I_i \times I_j$  ( $i, j \in V(G)$ ) which is equal to one if there is an edge between

the nodes  $i, j$  in  $G$  and zero otherwise. Thus,  $W^G$  is by construction a step-function and therefore often called step-graphon. To compare some graph  $G$  and graphon  $W$ , we can simply compare the graphons  $W$  and  $W^G$  in the space of graphons. Instead of  $W^G$  itself, we frequently consider the normalized associated graphon  $W_G / \|G\|_1$  to derive results that also hold in the sparse case. To measure how close two graphons are, the cut norm is a natural candidate and possesses many useful properties, see e.g. Lovász (2012) for a detailed discussion. For a graphon  $W: [0, 1]^2 \to \mathbb{R}$ , define the cut norm by

$$\|W\|_{\square} := \sup_{S, T \subseteq [0, 1]} \left| \int_{S \times T} W(x, y) \, dx \, dy \right|,$$

where  $S$  and  $T$  range over the measurable subsets of  $[0, 1]$ .

Starting with a graphon, we can use the following well-established construction to generate sparse random graphs with  $N$  nodes where we assume without loss of generality that the vertices are labeled by  $1, \dots, N$ . We choose  $x_1, \dots, x_N$  i.i.d. uniformly at random in  $[0, 1]$  and fix some  $\rho > 0$ . For all vertex pairs  $1 \le i < j \le N$  there is an edge between  $i$  and  $j$  with probability  $\min\{\rho W(x_i, x_j), 1\}$  which yields a sparse random graph  $\mathbf{G}(N, W, \rho)$ . A sequence of sparse random graphs generated by this method converges to the generating graphon  $W$  in the cut norm, see (Borgs et al., 2019, Theorem 2.14).

**Assumption 1.** *The sequence of normalized step-graphons  $(W_N)_{N \in \mathbb{N}}$  converges in cut norm  $\|\cdot\|_{\square}$  or equivalently in operator norm  $\|\cdot\|_{L_{\infty} \to L_1}$  (see Lovász (2012)) as  $N \to \infty$  to some graphon  $W \in \mathcal{W}_0$ , i.e.*

$$\|\rho_N^{-1} W_N - W\|_{\square} \to 0, \quad \|\rho_N^{-1} W_N - W\|_{L_{\infty} \to L_1} \to 0. \quad (1)$$

The limiting graphon in Assumption 1 is only guaranteed to exist for so-called  $L^p$  upper regular graph sequences, for details see Borgs et al. (2018), Borgs et al. (2019). This implicit assumption means that our approach does not apply to arbitrary sequences of sparse random graphs. If the average degree in the graph sequence does not tend to infinity as  $N \to \infty$ ,  $L^p$  upper regularity is not fulfilled. Thus, for example, the asymptotic behavior of ultra-sparse graph sequences is beyond the scope of  $L^p$  graphons. Nevertheless,  $L^p$  graphons are the limit of crucial sparse graph sequences such as power law graphs which cannot be provided by standard graphons. In our paper, 'power law' refers to the tail of the distribution. Figure 1 shows the advantages of  $L^p$  graphons over standard graphons using an exemplary real-world network (data from Rozemberczki et al. (2019)). The examples in the next sections are usually based on power law graphons  $W: [0, 1]^2 \to \mathbb{R}$  with  $W(x, y) = (1 - \alpha)^2(xy)^{-\alpha}$  where  $\alpha \in (0, 1)$ , see Borgs et al. (2018) for details.
